Feature/Add description of Identity deletion and effects of peer deletion on Relationships (#274)
nmshd/documentation: _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md

As with the [self-initiated Identity deletion]({% link _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md %}#self-initiated-identity-deletion), the [Cancel IdentityDeletionProcess]({% link _docs_use-cases/use-case-transport-cancel-identitydeletionprocess.md %}) use case can be executed by the Identity within the grace period if it no longer wants to be deleted.
If it is not cancelled by then, the Identity will be irreversibly deleted from the Backbone.

## Side Effects of Identity Deletion on Relationships

The deletion and even the triggering of the deletion of an Identity logically has an impact on the peers who have [established a Relationship]({% link _docs_integrate/establish-relationships.md %}) with it.
All peers of the Identity that is currently in deletion are informed that the deletion of the Identity has been triggered.
This is done via the `transport.peerToBeDeleted` [Connector event]({% link _docs_integrate/connector-events.md %}).
In addition, it is stored within the `peerDeletionInfo` property of the [Relationship]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#relationship) that the Identity currently has `"ToBeDeleted"` as `deletionStatus`.

> If the Identity is finally deleted, the `deletionStatus` changes to `"Deleted"` and the `transport.peerDeleted` Connector event can be received.

Author: Can anyone confirm that in this case it is already implemented that the Relationship also changes its `status` to `"DeletionProposed"`? @jkoenig134 @Magnus-Kuhn @Milena-Czierlinski

Reviewer: The Backbone has implemented this with release 6.19.0, but afaik we haven't added a test in the Runtime to check the status of the peerDeletionInfo, yet.

Author: Thanks for this hint with release 6.19.0 of the Backbone. 🎄

This should already be testable if we can now set the grace period for IdentityDeletionProcesses to zero for our test purposes, right?

Reviewer: Yes, however only decreasing the the grace period isn't enough. We also need to actually delete the Identity in the Backbone. We have a [draft PR](https://github.com/nmshd/runtime/pull/329) for that.

Author: Alright, I will wait with adding the test for a Relationship being set to `"DeletionProposed"` after the peer is deleted until https://github.com/nmshd/runtime/pull/329 is merged. ☃️

Reviewer: I am not sure how actively https://github.com/nmshd/runtime/pull/329 is being worked on. @jkoenig134 ?

Reviewer 2: Ehm, should be ready.

---
# Start automatic generation
permalink: integrate/delete-identities
redirect_from:
  - /integrate/delete-identity-from-enmeshed
published: true
title: "Delete Identities"
type: scenario
toc: true
properties:
  - id: SC061
  - category: Identities and Relationships
  - description:
  - customer: All
  - component: integrate
  - level: Beginner
  - implementation status: DONE
  - documentation status: DONE
  - published: true
  - link: delete-identities
require:
required_by:
  - integrate/exchange-messages
# End automatic generation
---

> It is not yet possible to utilize the use cases regarding the [IdentityDeletionProcesses]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#identitydeletionprocess) mentioned below as an Integrator of a Connector. Instead, these functionalities are currently only offered to App users in order to be able to delete their [Identity]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#identity). Even if some use cases still have to be provided to the Integrators of Connectors for deleting their Identity, they benefit from the description of the process of Identity deletion given in this guide. Indeed, if an App user with whom a Connector has established a Relationship deletes their Identity, it is affected by [side effects on this Relationship]({% link _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md %}#side-effects-of-identity-deletion-on-relationships).

Author: That was exactly the idea :)

> It is not yet possible to utilize the use cases regarding the [IdentityDeletionProcesses]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#identitydeletionprocess) mentioned below as an Integrator of a Connector. Instead, these functionalities are currently only offered to App users in order to be able to delete their [Identity]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#identity). Even if some use cases still have to be provided to the Integrators of Connectors for deleting their Identity, they benefit from the description of the process of Identity deletion given in this guide. Indeed, if an App user with whom a Connector has established a Relationship deletes their Identity, it is affected by [side effects on this Relationship]({% link _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md %}#side-effects-of-identity-deletion-on-relationships).

Reviewer 2: great!

{: .notice--warning}

Regardless of whether an [Identity]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#identity) is an App user or a Connector, it is stored on the Backbone.

> This guide describes the different [options for Identity deletion]({% link _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md %}#options-for-identity-deletion) from the Backbone.

Reviewer: Just FYI: If you want to link to sections on the same page, it is sufficient to use `[text](#section-title)`. That doesn't mean that you have to change it, but it might simplify your work in the future.

An IdentityDeletionProcess can have `"WaitingForApproval"`, `"Rejected"`, `"Approved"` or `"Cancelled"` as its `status`.
If it has `"WaitingForApproval"` or `"Approved"` as `status`, it is also referred to as an **active IdentityDeletionProcess**.
There can be at most one active IdentityDeletionProcess per Identity.
There are three [use cases]({% link _docs_integrate/use-cases.md %}) for getting one or more already existing [IdentityDeletionProcesses]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#identitydeletionprocess):

- If the `id` of an IdentityDeletionProcess is known, it can be viewed by calling the [Get IdentityDeletionProcess]({% link _docs_use-cases/use-case-transport-get-identitydeletionprocess.md %}) use case.
- All IdentityDeletionProcesses of an Identity can be viewed by utilizing the [Get IdentityDeletionProcesses]({% link _docs_use-cases/use-case-transport-get-identitydeletionprocesses.md %}) use case. This includes IdentityDeletionProcesses with `"Cancelled"` or `"Rejected"` as `status` in particular.

> - The [Get active IdentityDeletionProcess]({% link _docs_use-cases/use-case-transport-get-active-identitydeletionprocess.md %}) use case can be executed to view the currently active IdentityDeletionProcess if one exists. If none exists, the [error code]({% link _docs_integrate/error-codes.md %}) `error.runtime.identityDeletionProcess.noActiveIdentityDeletionProcess` arises if an attempt is made to apply the use case anyway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [Get active IdentityDeletionProcess]({% link _docs_use-cases/use-case-transport-get-active-identitydeletionprocess.md %}) use case can be executed to view the currently active IdentityDeletionProcess if one exists. If none exists, the [error code]({% link _docs_integrate/error-codes.md %}) `error.runtime.identityDeletionProcess.noActiveIdentityDeletionProcess` will arise if an attempt is made to apply the use case anyway.
```

## Options for Identity Deletion

In principle, there are several options for deleting an Identity from the Backbone.
For example, depending on the Backbone environment, it is conceivable to set up automatic Identity deletion after a long period of Identity inactivity.
More essential are the two options for actively deciding to delete an Identity from the Backbone:

- Initiation of the process of Identity deletion by the Identity itself.

> - The Backbone Admin UI triggers the process of Identity deletion and the Identity subsequently approves the triggered deletion of its Identity.

Reviewer 2: Please don't talk about the `Backbone Admin UI` as an Identity, instead speak about the `Backbone Administrator`. I don't think we should mention the UI at all in this docs.

Reviewer 2: Hm, I have to see how it's used already.

### Self-Initiated Identity Deletion

An Identity can actively trigger its own process of deletion by executing the [Initiate IdentityDeletionProcess]({% link _docs_use-cases/use-case-transport-initiate-identitydeletionprocess.md %}) use case.
Successful execution leads to the creation of an [IdentityDeletionProcess]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#identitydeletionprocess) with `"Approved"` as `status`.
In contrast to the [Identity deletion triggered via the Backbone Admin UI]({% link _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md %}#identity-deletion-triggered-via-the-backbone-admin-ui), no further approval of the Identity is therefore required.

> Instead, the Identity is immediately in deletion and will be irreversibly deleted from the Backbone once the end of the associated grace period of the IdentityDeletionProcess specified within its `gracePeriodEndsAt` property has been exceeded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, the Identity is immediately in deletion and will be irreversibly deleted from the Backbone once the end of the associated grace period of the IdentityDeletionProcess specified within its `gracePeriodEndsAt` property has been reached.
```

If it is neither approved nor rejected by then, it automatically changes its `status` to `"Cancelled"` and the Identity will not be deleted.
Moreover, please note that the use cases for approving or rejecting an IdentityDeletionProcess cannot be executed by the Identity if there is no IdentityDeletionProcess with `"WaitingForApproval"` as `status`.
An error with [code]({% link _docs_integrate/error-codes.md %}) `error.runtime.identityDeletionProcess.noWaitingForApprovalIdentityDeletionProcess` is otherwise thrown.
After the IdentityDeletionProcess has changed its `status` from `"WaitingForApproval"` to `"Approved"` as a result of the approval, it embodies that the Identity will be deleted after the grace period ends.
As with the [self-initiated Identity deletion]({% link _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md %}#self-initiated-identity-deletion), the [Cancel IdentityDeletionProcess]({% link _docs_use-cases/use-case-transport-cancel-identitydeletionprocess.md %}) use case can be executed by the Identity within the grace period if it no longer wants to be deleted.
If it is not cancelled by then, the Identity will be irreversibly deleted from the Backbone.

> ## Side Effects of Identity Deletion on Relationships

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Effects of Identity Deletion on Relationships
```

The instigation of the deletion of an Identity as well as the actual deletion logically have an impact on the peers who have [established a Relationship]({% link _docs_integrate/establish-relationships.md %}) with it.
All peers of the Identity that is currently in deletion are informed that the deletion of the Identity has been instigated.
This is done via the `transport.peerToBeDeleted` [Connector event]({% link _docs_integrate/connector-events.md %}).
In addition, it is stored within the `peerDeletionInfo` property of the [Relationship]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#relationship) that the Identity currently has `"ToBeDeleted"` as `deletionStatus`.

> The `status` of the Relationship remains `"Active"` for the moment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `status` of the Relationship remains `"Active"` for the time being.
```

> If the Identity is finally deleted, the `deletionStatus` changes to `"Deleted"` and the `transport.peerDeleted` Connector event can be received.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Identity is finally deleted, the `deletionStatus` will change to `"Deleted"` and the `transport.peerDeleted` Connector event can be received.
```

Since the deletion of an Identity leads to the [decomposition of its Relationships]({% link _docs_integrate/terminate-relationships.md %}#decompose-a-relationship), the `status` of the Relationship is changed to `"DeletionProposed"` and `"DecompositionDueToIdentityDeletion"` is specified as the `reason` of the associated [RelationshipAuditLogEntry]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#relationshipauditlogentry).

> Otherwise, if the Identity decides against its deletion within the grace period, the `peerDeletionInfo` of the Relationship is set back to `undefined` and the `transport.peerDeletionCancelledEvent` Connector event is triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, if the Identity decides against its deletion within the grace period, the `peerDeletionInfo` of the Relationship is set back to `undefined` and the `transport.peerDeletionCancelled` Connector event is triggered.
```

The deletion of an Identity has effects on [creating a new Relationship]({% link _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md %}#creation-of-new-relationships) to it, [sending Messages]({% link _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md %}#sending-messages) to it, [sending Requests to it and responding to Requests from it]({% link _docs_integrate/delete-identities.md %}#sending-and-responding-to-requests).

### Creation of New Relationships

To [establish a Relationship]({% link _docs_integrate/establish-relationships.md %}), an Identity must first create a [RelationshipTemplate]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#relationshiptemplate), which is then used by its peer to create a [Relationship]({% link _docs_integrate/data-model-overview.md %}#relationship) with `"Pending"` as `status`.

> However, if the creator of the RelationshipTemplate is meanwhile in deletion or has even deleted itself beforehand, the peer receives an error with [error code]({% link _docs_integrate/error-codes.md %}) `error.transport.relationships.activeIdentityDeletionProcessOfOwnerOfRelationshipTemplate` when trying to create a new Relationship using the RelationshipTemplate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if the creator of the RelationshipTemplate is meanwhile in deletion or has already deleted itself, the peer will receive an error with [error code]({% link _docs_integrate/error-codes.md %}) `error.transport.relationships.activeIdentityDeletionProcessOfOwnerOfRelationshipTemplate` when trying to create a new Relationship using the RelationshipTemplate.
```

Reviewer: Shouldn't we throw a different error, if the creator of the RelationshipTemplate is already deleted.

Author: That's probably true. Do you know which error is currently thrown in the Runtime in this case?

### Sending Messages

> An Identity is not permitted to [send a Message]({% link _docs_use-cases/use-case-transport-send-message-to-recipients.md %}) to a peer with which a Relationship has been established and which has already been deleted.

Reviewer: "[...] and which has already been deleted." I can't tell what this "which" is referring to. If you refer to the Identity, I'd omit the first past of the sentence for clarity, i.e. "An Identity is not permitted to [send a Message]({% link _docs_use-cases/use-case-transport-send-message-to-recipients.md %}) to a peer which has (already) been deleted". It isn't relevant to mention that they had a Relationship since it doesn't make a difference. 

Same for next section.

Author: I am referring to the peer as with the first part of the subordinate clause as well. It does make a difference if a Relationship is already existing or not. If no Relationship exists, a different error would be thrown. 

However, as you have problems understanding the sentences, I will rephrase them.

In principle, there are several options for deleting an Identity from the Backbone.
For example, depending on the Backbone environment, it is conceivable to set up automatic Identity deletion after a long period of Identity inactivity.

> More essential is the option of [actively initiate the process of Identity deletion from the Backbone by the Identity itself](#self-initiated-identity-deletion).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More essential is the option of [actively initiating the process of Identity deletion from the Backbone by the Identity itself](#self-initiated-identity-deletion).
```
